=head1 Notes on P6/CLR mapping

=head2 Classes and methods

Perl6 has pervasive duck typing.  C<my Str $x> actually means
C<< my $x where .^does(Str) >>; and can be overriden.  Thus, our methods have to
be able to, in principle, handle any representation type.  This is compouned
by the notion of per-object representational polymorphism in Perl 6.

Three representations will be used often.  The null representation provides for
protoobjects, and fails any attempt to access attributes.  A special dynamic
representation can have its shape modified at any time, and is thus needed for
pre-CHECK code.  Finally, the CLR native representation is used for normal
run-time objects.  CLR native representation is postponed for now.

There is also a CLR external representation.  More on why it's needed later.

Representations define the essential Perl 6 object operations - calling methods,
interrogative pronouns, and slot access.  Since all objects are handled as CLR
objects, the natural way to implement representation operations is as special
methods.  In the interests of allomorphic and polymorphic operation, the
representation interface is exposed to the CLR as an IPerl6Object interface.

Every Perl6 class creates a CLR class and a CLR interface for the CLR native
representation.  The interface makes efficient-ish multiple inheritance and
representation polymorphism possible.  Note that code has to use IPerl6Object,
not the specific interface, prior to specialization.  Specialization can go all
the way to the class form.

Methods present as one or more CLR methods.  Role methods (and non-method subs)
are static.  Every method has multiple supported calling conventions,
especially if old code can't be thrown out after a model change.  Capture
conversion is handled in the generic IPerl6Object; specialized representation
interfaces can offer more specific calling conventions.

=head2 Pessimizers

We have objects called "pessimizers".  They encapsulate optimizations that need
to be delayed, changes to the program that could happen.  For instance, a
pessimizer could represent the possibility that SomeClass could be augmented.
Pessimizers watch the program model; they also have a "cancel" operation that
allows the optimizations to be performed.  Pessimizers can be linked, such that
cancelling the outer pessimizer cancels the inner.  When a use statement is
compiled, or any other recursive compiler invocation, the used code's
pessimizer is linked to the user.  After the outermost call to the compiler
returns, the main program CHECK time in the first such case but also after
requires and evals, the resulting pessimizer is automatically cancelled.  Since
we change our model so much, we like to generate IL lazily if we can.

=head2 Multiple dispatch

In all multiple dispatch situations, the full set of candidates is known at
some places.  Lexical multiple dispatch has a fixed set in any lexical scope;
method multiple dispatch has a fixed set in any class; package multiple
dispatch in namespaces.  So we just need to compile a dispatcher right there.
Generation of decision trees for pattern matching is well studied; see
'Compiling pattern matching' by Lennart 'augustss' Augustsson.

=head2 CLR imports

Namespaces from other CLR assemblies manifest as sealed packages.  Classes so
obtained will be unsuitable for usage in multiple inheritance.  Individual
objects cannot be directly used, so they will be wrapped up in an object with
the "CLR external" representation; this, conveniently, provides IPerl6Object
and any mapped role classes.  This is invisible to the user, as WHICH and WHERE
are delegated to the repr and work correctly.

=head2 CLR exports

A set of Perl6 modules could be compiled to an assembly.  Since CLR has no
pessimizers, any module so compiled would need immediate optimization.  Many
questions remain.

=head2 gather/take and CPS

C<gather> and C<take> require the ability to stop a sub in mid-execution and
continue it later.  Since any unknown function can call C<take>, all functions
(until we have pessimizers working) need to be encoded with explicit stack
frame objects; and we need to B<support> the transformation in all cases.

For CLR compatibility all exposed functions which use CPS internally need to
provide a recursive-runloop-starting face...

=head2 Control exceptions

Control flow in Perl 6 is logically handled using exceptions.  However, there
is a beautifully simple implementation of this (from pmichaud I think?); just
store the frame to return to in a closed-over lexical variable, and rely on
outward continuation semantics to implement the lexotic control exception.

=head2 Resumable exceptions

In Perl 6, throwing exceptions doesn't unwind the stack; it just calls a
handler, which can unwind the stack itself using lexotic control flow if it
wants.  (Yes, this is circular with the last paragraph.  Deal.)  For normal
exceptions, the handler is not allowed to return normally, which makes the
distinction moot; warnings and take work differently.

=head2 Lexical continuation

Perl 6 eval requires the ability to access outer lexicals.  That's just
introspection on the caller's frame.  The setting is a special case of this;
there's a function in the compiler (probably written in C# or something) which
defines a bunch of primitives, then evals the user code.  Or maybe it uses an
internal API directly.

=head2 SPECIALIZE

SPECIALIZE (or SPECIALISE) is parsed as a phaser; in it is a list of type
objects.  The enclosing function gets extra multis (or not quite; it shouldn't
affect dispatch) for the cases.  Will probably be involved in the
implementation of CLR object usage; functions being specialized on IRealAny.
Specialization, and lazy code generation, are the crux of optimization in
Niecza.

=head2 BEGIN

C<BEGIN> must take special care to not deal with classes being defined, as once
a type has been submitted to ref emit, it cannot be changed.  This will result
in some slowdown.  I'm OK with that; most C++ template engines don't compile
to native code either.

=head2 Three kinds of pad

Normal run-time pads are CLR objects of some dedicated class, based loosely on
Perlesque frame objects.  Compile time pads are hashes, so they can be extended
as things are declared.  This is very similar to the hash/clr representation
dichotomy with objects; unification could be worthwhile.  Package pads will be
hashes like any uncloned pad, but need special handling in CLR export.

=head2 Variables

When C<my $foo> is executed, two objects are created, a C<Variable> and a
C<ScalarContainer>.  The C<Variable> is a native type; it is B<not> a Perl 6
object, although it can be reified as one.  The symbol table points to the
variable, which points to the container, which points to the value.  The
variable keeps its identity through binds; the container doesn't.  A variable
is a boxed object, representing the runtime manifestation of a bvalue.
Functions return variables, in order that postcircumfixes can be bound;
however, functions do not take variables.  C<< &infix:<:=> >> and
C<< prefix:<VAR> >> are macros, not functions.  Since variables are not bound
to functions, the variable object for a lexical often need not be generated;
the container pointer itself is what's passed to functions and it can be stored
in the frame.

=head2 RIP lexotic continuations

Because of C<CONTROL>, all control exceptions which pass through a statically
unknown set of frames need to use the handler-chain mechanism, except for
C<CONTROL>/C<CATCH>'s own unwinding.  A set of handlers is used to relay
exceptions when the CLR wants to start a recursive runloop.  Since we're now
only using CPS for C<gather>/C<take>, using Mono's native delimited
continuations is back on the table.

=head1 Notes on the compiler

These are in chronological order.  If two conflict, the later is right.

=head2 Finitary bodies and scopes

We need to keep the C<Scope> and C<Body> objects, which are constructed by
the parser, typologically distinct from C<CallFrame> and C<Code>.  By avoiding
issues of cloning, it is possible to track all such objects created during a
compilation.  The compiler is not reentrant in a conventional sense; any call
to C<eval> or any C<use> statement adds code to the I<current> compilation.
At C<CHECK> time (or maybe sooner if C<BEGIN> time user code needs to run?),
C<Scope> and C<Body> objects are I<completed>.  This means that the compiler
determines exactly what they need to contain and provides gifts of code.  The
objects themselves do not control the compilation; this is necessary to keep
the compiler out of the kernel.

=head2 The two metamodels

C<StaticClassHOW> is used for most compiling tasks, and is available much
earlier in the setting.  A single instance of it can manage many classes, since
it corresponds to a class I<declaration>, which may be in a clonable context.
The business here is in the compiler; a CIL class is generated and used to
instantiate the metaobject.

C<ClassHOW> is able to actually generate unrelated classes at run time.

[Edit: StaticClassHOW is not going to be used in the setting due to augment
Mu concerns.  Mu will be defined using ClassHOW, stripped down.]

=head2 Weird eval rules

In order for precompilation to work, we need to fix the code which the compiler
sees.  Therefore, C<BEGIN> blocks are not allowed to use C<&CORE::eval> when
the precompiler is activated.

We may go further and ban all I/O from C<BEGIN> blocks under these
circumstances.  If this is done, the compiler rule becomes unneeded.

=head2 New interface model

Interfaces represent duck typing; they are somewhat inferred, like Go, and need
not share referential identity, like COM.  If a role or class Foo exists, IFoo
exists; an object can create an IFoo presentation if and only if C<.^does(Foo)>.
A C<Foo $a> argument is optimized to directly involve IFoo, so gradual typing
actually eliminates most late binding in this model.  Difficulties exist with
monkey typing; the simple solution is to say IFoo is the original version of
Foo, and any added methods must be late bound.  We could also version things,
with subtyping (IFoo3 implies IFoo2).

=head2 Units only

We don't need to deeply track every single Body and ClassTemplate in use.
Merely tracking compilation units is enough.

=head2 A new IL

(Very conjectural) For glue code, we provide SIR, an externalized form of the
CodeGen API.  It has a surface syntax based on Forth and provides a stack model
with built-in CPS but mapping near injectively to CIL.

=head2 PRELUDE and PRE-INIT

Two special phasers are provided by the Alpha metacompiler (Beta uses the
standard Perl 6 phasers).  PRE-INIT runs while runtime structures are being
constructed.  It can inject things into the nascent protolexpad.  PRELUDE runs
before the structures are constructed at all; the definitions of Frame stuff
needs to go here.

=head2 Protoclasses

A special kind of class-like object exists in protopads.  It is the protoclass,
and it functions much like a protopad.  Protoclasses carry unbound methods;
they exist in a static scope.  A protoclass can be cloned into a full class by
associating it with an OUTER:: scope.  A protoclass defined in more than one
place (using augment or supercede) will require more than one OUTER::; the main
clone sets up the first OUTER, subsequent ones set up by the runtime
manifestation of augments.

=head2 Death of NIL

Due to persistant stack issues, NIL is no more.  Instead, use CgOp, which is
a Lisp-like presentation of the low level optree.

=head1 Brief overview of the compiler

User runs C<niecza.exe>.  Entry point is in C<Niecza::Compiler>, the driver.
C<Niecza::Compiler> parses arguments, decides the user wants to run some Perl
6 code (gasp!), passes it off to C<STD>.  C<STD> calls action methods in
C<Niecza::Actions>, which construct a bunch of objects and metaobjects; mostly
specced things like C<Hash> and C<Block> and C<ClassHOW>, but a few compiler
things too, like C<Niecza::Meta::Op>.  The top level code, as a C<Block>, is
passed back to C<Niecza::Compiler>.  C<Niecza::Compiler>, seeing that it was
told to B<run> the code, calls C<< postcircumfix:<( )> >>.
C<< postcircumfix:<( )> >> sees that the C<$!Method> property is null and
constructs a CLR method.  The method is run.  (Eventually, pessimizers and
modules will enter this picture)
