=head1 ABOUT

This is 'Niecza', which is a Perl 6 implementation focusing on
optimization and efficient implementation research.  It targets the
Common Language Runtime (ECMA-335; implementations are "Mono" and ".NET").

For a list of supported features, see L<http://perl6.org/compilers/features>.

=head1 DEPENDENCIES (RUNTIME)

=over 4

=item *

To run on Mono:  2.6.4 and later are well-tested, though success has been
reported with 2.4.x as well.  ggoebel on #perl6 reports that 2.6.7 fails
with a bus error on OS X 10.4 x86, but 2.6.4 works; 2.6.7 is fine on other
platforms.

2.8.2 or later is recommended for best performance; you should use
C<RUN_CLR=mono-sgen> in this case.  2.10 (latest stable) is also tested.

(2.6.x is currently broken due to versioning issues.  Stay tuned.)

Debian and derivatives have a modular mono packaging; you should install
'mono-complete'.  (The other packages exist for the sake of Debian-packaged
programs.)

To run on Windows/Mono (2.8.2 and 2.10) and other systems, download the
mono installers from C<http://go-mono.org/>

=item *

To run on Windows/Microsoft .NET 3.5 (2.0 runtime with 3.5 extensions)
or .NET 4.0, install the .NET runtime from C<http://goo.gl/PMKvB>

=back

=head1 DEPENDENCIES (BUILD FROM SOURCE)

=over 4

=item *

wget (to fetch a bootstrapping binary).

=item *

GNU make

=item *

unzip

=back

=head1 USING

    $ make # only if using a source copy
    ... snip build spam ...
    $ mono run/Niecza.exe
    niecza> say 2 + 2
    4
    niecza> ^D
    $ mono run/Niecza.exe -e 'say 2 + 2'
    4
    $

Notes: The first time the compiler is run, the setting must be compiled,
which adds about a minute on most hardware to the runtime.  The second
run will be much faster.  Also, the recompilation checker is not robust
to file format changes; it may be necessary to clean temporary files
after updates.

Building on Windows currently requires the Cygwin environment with Mono's
gmcs.exe in your Cygwin shell's $PATH, though in principle .NET's csc.exe
could be made to work eventually, if it doesn't already.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Niecza is Copyright 2010-2011 Stefan O'Rear et al.  It may be used and
distributed under the Artistic License 2.0 (included under LICENSE).

Some files are included from other projects, and have their own copyright
notices.

=head1 CREDITS AND PRIOR ART

This project was originally a spin-off of experiments done for
Matthew "diakopter" Wilson's sprixel project, and was heavily inspired by
many of its lower-level details.
