=head1 Synopsis

This is an overview of the Niecza ecosystem, which is currently contained
entirely inside the repository.

=head1 Compiler

Found mostly in C<src/>, this parses Perl 6 and converts it to a
representation that can be consumed by the backend.  See C<compiler.pod>
for more details.

=head1 Runtime system

This comprises C<lib/*.cs>; it is the body of C# primitives necessary
for compiler output to function, or that underlie the lowest levels
of library functionality.  It also contains the back end of the compiler
which integrates Perl 6 output with C<System.Reflection.Emit>.

=head1 Core library

C<lib/CORE.setting> is used automatically in Perl 6 programs and provides
definitions of all Perl 6 functions.  It uses Niecza extensions fairly
heavily, especially inline NAM code and references into the runtime.

=head1 Other libraries

C<lib/*.pm6> currently provides multithreading and a TAP stub.  I hope to see
more here eventually.  Or maybe we'll integrate with "ecosystem".

C<lib/COR*.setting> provides the settings used by C<-p> and C<-n>.

=head1 Build system

C<Makefile> is in charge of the build process; it downloads a bootstrap
compiler, builds the new compiler, and builds the libraries.  It can also
be used to make a new bootstrap image and run tests.

There has been some discussion of rewriting it in C# to support non-Cygwin
Windows.

=head1 Documentation

Start in this file, and follow links as needed.  Also see the archived
release announcements.

=head1 Miscellany

C<perf/> contains various scripts used to microbenchmark changes in
Niecza.  C<tools/> contains a handful of tools that are useful while
developing Niecza.  C<examples/> contains demos of Perl 6 code that works
(especially well) on Niecza, often using Niecza extensions like CLR
interoperability.

=head1 Test suite

C<test.pl> is the main test suite; all tests in it are expected to pass.
C<test2.pl> and C<test3.pl> are much smaller and allowed to contain failing
tests; I use them as a TDD staging area.

Now that Niecza can run roast tests, most new tests should go into roast,
not here.  Only add new tests here if they are essentially linked to
Niecza extensions.
