=head1 Synopsis

Tracing options available in the Niecza (.NET) runtime

=head1 General

Boolean options only care about the presence or absence of the
named environment variable.

=head1 Kernel.cs

=head2 C<NIECZA_TRACE>

This enables per-operation tracing by instrumenting the trampoline.
It may be set to C<all> or C<stat>.  If it is set to C<all>, then the
call tree will be printed in real time; each trampoline bounce displays
a node and the current call depth.  If it is set to C<stat>, then the
call stack will be printed every 1 million bounces (by default).

The C<all> mode is useful for debugging the context of crashes,
especially infinite loops in a single operation.  For Perl 6-level
infinite loops, C<stat> is more useful; C<stat> can also be used as a
primitive profiler, though its utility is limited by the fact that it
does not count real time.

=head2 C<NIECZA_TRACE_PERIOD>

This sets the display interval for C<NIECZA_TRACE=stat>.  Defaults to
C<1000000>.  Setting it lower is potentially useful in a profiling
context.

=head1 Cursor.cs

=head2 C<NIECZA_DIE_AT_PCT>

Throw an exception and generate a stack dump at a specific point in the
parsing process.  Only meaningful in conjunction with
C<NIECZA_HIGHWATER_TRACE>; for instance, setting this to C<53> will die
immediately after the generation of the "53%" status report.

=head2 C<NIECZA_HIGHWATER_TRACE>

Generates running status reports for all regex matches against long
strings (greater than 100 characters).  The status measured is the
high-water mark, the highest character position yet seen (for speed
reasons, this is only sampled when backtracking, at the end of rules,
and on entry to longest-term matching).

=head2 C<NIECZA_LTM_TRACE>

Generates extensive reports on the construction and use of longest-term
automata.

=head2 C<NIECZA_RX_TRACE>

Traces some regex primitives (currently only C<< <ws> >>, was more
before newrx was merged).  Each time ws is called, this will be
reported, along with the position of the attempt and whether it
succeeded.

=head1 JSYNC.cs

=head2 C<NIECZA_JSYNC_WRITER_FAILSOFT>

Encode unencodable objects as the string C<"UNSERIALIZABLE Type">, to
make it easier to find them in the data structure.
